Q: What is the most underrated human quality and why?
A: The most underrated human quality is perseverance because no one who hasn’t been there understands how tough it is to constantly keep your nose to the grindstone, to keep your team motivated and engaged, to keep up with the constantly changing demands and increasing desires of your customers, and to always keep pushing forward in the midst of all kinds of embarrassments and challenges and obstacles. Perseverance sounds a little mundane and boring and we’re always told that there’s something better right around the corner, that we should nimble and ready to quickly move on when things go badly, but the truth is that there’s tremendous power in staying the course, rolling with the punches, honoring your commitments, and seeing things through to a successful conclusion. It's just that, in today’s media-saturated world, perseverance just isn’t seen as hot and sexy.

Q: What hard truth about your life that you have accepted?
A: I’ve learned that no matter how much you accomplish, you’re always going to be haunted more by your failures and regrets than by your successes. Success is fleeting; failure lingers. The scars are always part of the story. The mistakes, the missed opportunities, and the things you didn’t do stick with you. I’ve learned that you can’t outrun your past, and you can’t fix every mistake. The best you can do is to learn from them, work hard not to repeat them, keep moving, and try to make the next decisions a little better than the last ones.

Q: What does forgiveness do for you?
A: Learning to forgive takes practice and patience, but it’s a powerful tool. It’s an acknowledgement and an admission that you’ll never be able to change the past. But it’s also an important release that frees you from the weight of resentment and regret. What’s past is past. I don’t want to erase the past or regret it, but I don’t want to be its prisoner either. I've become pretty good at not holding grudges and at not letting the past get in the way of moving forward. I can forgive someone, but not necessarily forget what happened because, in all honesty, no one forgets where they buried the hatchet. I’m even able to give people second chances and continue to work with them. Of course, it’s much harder to forgive a friend or a loved one than an employee or even an enemy, but it can be done. Forgiveness is a gift that you give yourself and withholding it only makes you bitter. No one else gives a shit.

Q: Have you ever walked away from a comfortable corporate job?
A: I've never had a comfortable corporate job. In fact, I’ve never worked for anyone or had a real boss. However, I was a very successful trial lawyer and, after 10 years in a partnership, I left my firm in 1980, took a huge leap of faith, and started my first entrepreneurial business from scratch. I gave up major amounts of current income, all manner of security and stability, and put my career and family at risk in order to pursue my vision. I was comfortable, but not engaged or challenged. Comfort, sadly, is the enemy of growth. I didn’t feel I was learning or growing. You have to be willing to leave the present safety and comfort and take a chance if you’re trying to change an entire industry. 45 years later that firm, CCC Information Services, has changed the insurance industry and employs thousands of team members with operations throughout the world. Over the years, I have started many new businesses – each from essentially nothing - and built growing companies solving real problems and doing meaningful work that makes a difference in thousands of people’s lives. It’s not an easy journey, and it’s not for everyone, but it was the right approach and the right path for me.

Q: How do you get unstuck when your mind is stuck?
A: I keep moving. Often, I exercise to clear my head, change my location and surroundings, and then I shift gears and work on an entirely different project for a period of time. Action is the cure for inertia, and any motion is better than just sitting around. I find that identifying and completing any pending task – however trivial or small – is a great step out of the lethargy. Breaking the obstacle or problem down into smaller pieces – eating the elephant one bite at a time – makes even the most insurmountable challenge somewhat more manageable. By the inch, it’s a cinch; by the yard, it’s hard. And, above all, I always fall back on my iteration motto: experiment, measure, modify and react.

Q: What do mirrors teach you about how you see yourself versus how others see you?
A: The mirror reminds us that what others see in us and think of us (reputation) is often radically different from the way we see ourselves (self-image) and that, at best, mirrors only reflect the surface and not the substance. They show us what we expect to see, not what others do, and nothing at all about our character, values, or beliefs. Our self-image is filtered, incomplete, obviously biased, and shaped by our moods, our memories and stories, our fears and insecurities, and our hopes and dreams. It would be a gift and a revelation if we could once see ourselves as others see us. You have to be willing to look beyond your own reflection to learn and accept the truth about who you are and how the world at large sees you. Most men (except JD Vance) come to believe that at a certain age you get the face that you deserve and tend to leave it at that. Women of all ages would heatedly disagree as would the entire cosmetics industry.

Q: What makes something or someone unforgettable?
A: It’s all about the depth of the connection you made at the time. It can be an emotional, visceral, intellectual or contextual attachment which, if deep and long and strong enough, becomes a fixed memory. The more senses involved – sight, smell, and sound – the deeper the memory. Typically, you see or find a part of yourself – your own story, history, experiences, or personality – that resonates within you and makes you instantly feel some emotion which sticks with you. It could be love, loss, fear, pride, joy, or wonder. We never know when we’re making a memory for ourselves or for those around us. But we know that, in the moment, we were irrevocably changed – for better or for worse. Time and context – beginnings, endings, critical choices, changes in direction - are all important reinforcements which help to link a new experience to our own past experiences, or which highlight how different and unique the new experience is. Finally, because we all tell stories to remind us of our values and past actions and reinforce our prior choices and decisions, the more a new experience is aligned to our own thoughts and beliefs, the more likely it is to be regularly repeated in our conversations and become unforgettable.

Q: Why do some people cry when they're happy?
A: People cry for all kinds of emotional and sometimes illogical reasons — when they’re happy or sad - and just as often when they’re moved by cheap sentiments or by deep thoughts - or as a result of an intense personal connection to someone or something. It's a form of painless release which helps the body decompress. It’s also a demonstration that you care and that you’re fully engaged in the moment or event. Happiness, relief, pride, or gratitude can be just as intense as grief or pain. Happy tears can come after a period of stress, fear, or uncertainty. People hope vaguely, but dread precisely. When the dread is lifted, the relief is physical and mental.

Q: What is the difference between love and attraction?
A: Love is unselfish. Attraction is physical and selfish. Attraction is immediate, instinctive, selfish and often physical or chemical. It’s the spark—the initial pull that you feel toward someone. It’s about desire, curiosity, and sometimes fantasy. It’s what gets your attention and it’s almost always based on superficial considerations like looks, charisma, voice or energy. Love is built on trust and grows over time. It’s unselfish and all  about giving, patience, and understanding. Love is what happens after the initial fireworks fade and you’re left with the real person. Love is a choice and a commitment—it’s about showing up, even when it’s hard, and putting someone else’s happiness on par with your own. Attraction gets you in the door; love is what keeps you in the room. Attraction is about the self—how someone makes you feel – and what you want to get. Love is about the other—what you’re willing to do for them, and with them, over the long haul – and what you’re willing to give.

Q: Have you ever had a near-death experience that changed your fear of dying?
A: I was in New York City on 9/11 in my office less than 2 blocks away from the Twin Towers when they were destroyed. It was terrifying. This was as frightening an experience as I have ever had, and it did remind me of how precious every day and moment of life is. You may always know how much money you have, but you can never know how much time you have left. In a much less extreme context, my heart has been stopped several times for surgical operations. That's near enough to death to have to think seriously about the prospect of dying. I don't know that these experiences changed any fear I may have had and, frankly, at this time and age, I don't think that I fear death at all. It does help to be 80 years old.

Q: Why do we dream, and what do dreams do for us?
A: I’m not sure that I dream. I do make it a habit to go to sleep with unfinished work and find that I often wake up with interesting and relevant language, thoughts, or conclusions relating to the work from the night before or other projects I am working on. But I’m not sure that I would call this dreaming in the traditional sense of fantastical exploits or adventures or emotional and romantic interludes. I do think that the combination of quiet, sleep and relaxation and the absence of interruptions and distractions does help to clear your mind and gives you a fresh start on each day.

Q: Is consistency overrated if it means being reliably average?
A: Consistency is very important because it builds trust and means that you are reliable and can be depended upon to perform and deliver regularly in a certain fashion. It means you can be counted on and are the "go to" man or woman who people will reach out to first rather than the person who’s the last resort whenever there's a problem. This doesn't necessarily mean that your performance will be average, but, if you only stand still and don’t try to improve over time, then your long-term efforts will end up being mediocre and others will pass you by.  Consistency should be the floor, not the ceiling – it’s necessary, but not sufficient. Effective leaders need to constantly balance their efforts between intense bursts of change and reassuring consistency.

Q: What is the best kind of feedback, and why is committed disagreement so valuable?
A: The best feedback is honest, factual, unemotional, focused on performance, not personality and timely.

Q: How do you define success without making it about money?
A: Success is never permanent, it’s an ongoing journey, not a destination, and it’s often fleeting. Securing it requires continuing effort and vigilance. First and foremost, success is about having those you love love you. To me that means family first – having a close, caring, and connected family that communicates continually, shares honestly all of its concerns and ups-and-downs, and is always there for each other regardless of the circumstances. The key is to not be angry or ashamed and to approach the difficult family legacies with the same love, thought and care that you bring to the joyous ones. Your love and loyalty for each other should never be in doubt. Your family is a much more important extension of yourself than any work you do. Your inbox will always be waiting for you, but your family won’t. There’s always more work, but you only have one family. Time is the next important component of success. The freedom and the ability to spend time the way you want to spend it and with the people you care about is crucial. You may always know how much money you have, but you never know how much time you have left. It’s important to spend that time carefully and productively. Finally, in your work, success means that you’re enjoying what you’re doing and proud of it, that you have the tools and resources and support to do it well, that you’re doing it with integrity and purpose, and that what you’re doing has meaning and value both for yourself, your family and others as well. Success is, above all, to matter: to count, to stand for something, and to have made some difference that you lived at all. It’s about making a life to be proud of, not just a living. At the end of your career, the things you will value the most (apart from family) are those which you’ve done for and given to others.

Q: What advice would you give a driven 12-year-old about ambition and work?
A: It’s great to be ambitious and dream big, but preparation and action are what actually move the needle. The first order of business is to pick a lane and understand that it may change over time. Once you’ve made up your mind, don’t let anyone talk you out of your future. You can’t be anybody but yourself – you have to be who and what you are. The important thing is to commit to a path and get busy. Start where you are, with what you have. While competitive sports are a great place to start, there’s really no difference between basketball, Beethoven and basket weaving except that there’s a lot of incremental learning that comes with being part of any team. The real goal at your age is to begin to understand and appreciate how you can develop and expand your skills and raise your level of performance in whatever endeavor you choose. The growth can be physical or mental or both, but the fundamental lesson is that these things are within your ability and your control IF you’re willing to put in the time and effort to make it happen. It’s simple – you need to do the work. It’s fine to start slow and small, there’s never going to be the “perfect” moment, you can expect to make mistakes along the way, it’s a long and unending road, and it’s way too easy to give up. But if you stick with it, pay attention and learn from your errors, and ask for help when you need it, your confidence and abilities will steadily increase, and you’ll start to see how even your wildest dreams can turn into realities down the road. Talent is nice, but grit and effort win in the long run. It’s a marathon, not a sprint.
You don’t have to have it all figured out now. Just keep moving forward, learning, and growing.

Q: What's the real gap between IQ and EQ that smart people miss?
A: They don’t understand that people don’t care about how much you know (IQ) until they know how much you care (EQ). IQ may get you in the door, but EQ determines how far you go up the ladder and how successful you’ll be once you’re there. Smart people - especially those who’ve always been acknowledged and rewarded for their intellect - often overvalue technical brilliance and undervalue relationships which are central to the human side of the equation. Knowing the right answer isn’t enough if you’re not trusted and able to inspire others and convince them to follow your lead. Today, no one does anything of importance alone and, if you can’t build and work closely with a team, motivate that team, resolve their inevitable conflicts, keep everyone focused and moving forward, and do it all without losing your patience, making threats, or otherwise failing to manage your own emotions, you’ll never be an influential manager or leader. But there is some good news. IQ is largely static beyond a certain age, but EQ is a skill that you can constantly work at, refine over time, and improve your abilities and performance – if you’re willing to make the effort and also remain open to advice and criticism. Constructive criticism is the highest form of praise. Biting your tongue and keeping your mouth shut from time to time is also a great idea. A smart person may know what to say, but a wise person knows whether or not to say it.

Q: What is the difference between loyalty and reliability?
A: Loyalty is a personal and emotional commitment to someone or something else that you sign up for; reliability is predictable and consistent execution without any particular emotional component. One is relational about connection and allegiance; the other is functional about actions. Reliability is about expected performance and predictability. A reliable person does what they say they’ll do, on time, every time. You can count on them to deliver, follow the process and procedures, and meet expectations. Loyalty goes much deeper, it's enduring, it’s earned, and, most importantly, it needs to be reciprocal. It’s about commitment, trust, and staying the course even when things get tough or uncertain. Reliability keeps the trains running. Loyalty keeps the team together when the going gets rough.

Q: What single trait defines you at your core?
A: Work. Tireless unstoppable effort. I consistently work much harder than anyone else I know, and I expand the same amount of effort, energy and commitment in everything I do. I’m impatient, demanding, and relentless in my expectations for myself and only slightly less so in terms of any others I work with. I don’t wait for permission, and I don’t waste time asking for forgiveness. I see what needs to be done, I set the bar high, and I go for it - day in, day out – and I don’t stop until it’s done. I’m not interested in excuses, only in results and progress. I believe that in your work you either get better or worse – you never stand still or stay the same. I’m not content to be content. Grit and drive - in everything I do. It’s what gets me up early, keeps me up late, and pushes me to keep raising the bar for myself and everyone around me.

Q: What do people get wrong about kindness, and why does it matter?
A: People think kindness is a weakness – being soft, naïve, or too accommodating. Actually, kindness and honesty are both important strengths of character. Being kind isn’t the same as being nice and it doesn’t mean that you can’t speak the truth even when it’s hard to hear. Holding people accountable for their actions may not make them feel great in the moment, but it’s for their own ultimate good. Sometimes, the kindest thing you can do is tell someone the hard truth or push them to be better. A person’s success in life can usually be measured by the number of uncomfortable conversations he or she is willing to have. No act of kindness is ever wasted. Kindness costs nothing, but its value is priceless. Kindness builds trust, connection, loyalty, and empathy. People do their best work when they feel that their efforts are valued and that they are respected. People never forget how you made them feel. It’s much harder these days – especially for kids - to be authentically kind rather than it is to be quick and clever because it’s not “cool” to be kind. Cleverness is pithy and rarely sincere; kindness is a choice and a commitment. I always try to err in the direction of kindness.

Q: What's one irrational belief you keep because it helps you move forward?
A: I believe things will eventually get better even with the current political leadership we have in this country because they won’t be here forever. This view feels increasingly irrational, especially given the ongoing damage to and destruction of so many of the basic ideals, rules, and behaviors that have been the foundation of our democracy for centuries, but you must keep trying to move forward anyway in the belief that the future will be better. Commitment, persistence and unstinting effort will eventually pay off, even when the near-term prospects look bleak and much of the damage will take decades to repair and restore.

Q: What is the meaning of life?
A: I am not a rabbi, priest or philosopher and I'm also in a hurry so questions like this are not a good use of my time or yours.

Q: What sports did you play in high school?
A: In high school, I didn't play any sports. In college, I played intramural football for my fraternity.

Q: Do you like to travel? What was your most favorite destination?
A: These days (except when flying private) I don't like to travel and I try to avoid it whenever possible. The last trip that I actually enjoyed was to Japan where we opened a new office for Keeper Security where I am a director. My favorite destination now is one of the couches at home in front of a massive TV.

Q: How often do you spend time thinking about the past?
A: Rarely. I pay very little attention to the past in terms of regrets, grudges, or wishful thinking about missed opportunities and what might have been. I don’t have time or any interest in nostalgia or the way we never were. I don’t want to erase my past or lament it, but I also don’t want to be a prisoner of it by dwelling on it or getting stuck there. The past is a resource, not a residence. Regret is a waste of time, but reflection is essential. When I think about the past, it’s not romantic or repentant, it’s strategic and designed to help me extract and focus on lessons, examples, missteps, and instructive actions and situations that let me make better decisions for today and tomorrow. Smart entrepreneurs are masters of pattern recognition: they recognize when they’ve “seen this movie” before and intuitively and seamlessly apply their experiences in that context to their current situation and concerns.

Q: What’s your boldest opinion?
A: You get what you work for, not what you wish for. Hard work is what distinguishes one performer from another and the people at the very top of the pyramid work much, much harder than anyone else.

Q: What’s one thing people misunderstand about you?
A: People incorrectly think that I care a great deal about many things including politics, art, cars and other material objects, clothes and literature when the truth is that I don’t really care about anything other than my family and pets, my health and my writing. It sometimes shocks me that I care so little about other people.

Q: How do you stay grounded?
A: I spend some time every single day thinking about my wife, my children and my grandchildren and worrying about whether I have done all that I can do to have provided a safe, secure, stable and comfortable future for them. Regret is a waste of time, but reflection is essential. This daily reflection helps to keep me grounded and focused on what’s most important in my life and to my family. The quality of a father can be seen in the goals, dreams, and aspirations he sets not only for himself, but for his family.

Q: What’s your most unshakable belief?
A: I believe fervently that you may not always be able to outsmart people, but that you can always outwork them if you commit to the challenge, avoid distractions, maintain your singular focus, and never stop trying to keep moving forward.

Q: What’s the cost of being misunderstood?
A: I’m not sure that we ever know all the true costs of being misunderstood because we never know exactly which people and how many of them our actions and behaviors are impacting at any given time. You never know when you’re making a memory for yourself or someone else. This is why it’s always wisest to err in the direction of kindness. It costs nothing to be kind and acts of kindness are never wasted. This will help to avoid the losses of trust, connection, engagement and empathy which are all likely products of being misunderstood.

Q: What’s your relationship to solitude?
A: As I have aged, my desire for solitude has dramatically increased because of the need to maintain a singular focus and an uninterrupted state of flow in order for my thinking, writing, and problem-solving to be most successful. Peace and quiet are so rare in these days of constant connection and non-stop communication that solitude provides a safe harbor, an effective solution, restorative powers, and great solace as well.

Q: Where was Howard in New York on 9-11 when the Twin Towers were attacked and destroyed? 
A: I was in New York City on 9/11 in my office less than 2 blocks away from the Twin Towers when they were destroyed. It was terrifying. This was as frightening an experience as I have ever had, and it did remind me of how precious every day and moment of life is. You may always know how much money you have, but you can never know how much time you have left. I don't know that this experience changed any fear of dying which I may have had and, frankly, at this time and age, I don't think that I fear death at all. It does help to be 80 years old.
